CTO2 Paradigm Shift.

Paradigm shift

I think that finally, we have a achieve the paradigm shift that has come with defining the location of locomotive consists. 

The original CTO was predicated on the locomotives, knowing their location is within four blocks is defined by a magnet position on the low line. Now the trains no exactly where they are at least within plus or -300 mm. And by defining the length of the consist, they know where their boundaries are as a traveling entity on the The track along with the direction, which is now also a fact that the train knows.

The other concept that we’ve increased that we’ve added our a stopping algorithm for a train stop ahead a staircase with defines the amount of track that they will cover before they stop the mile markers also define the exact point at which they stop as opposed to just cutting power and coasting or gradually decreasing power without knowing how actually how much track that cover covers before they stop.

Before the station stop sequence required that the trains decelerate at a particular point and the following train accelerate sooner from the same point, whereas the leading train would delay acceleration that would move on up further on the track. Now we can not only tell the leading train where to stop we can also tell the following train that it must keep a required distance between the front of its consist and the rear of the train heads consist, and also the amount of track spaces or essentially when the trailing train must start deacceleration to avoid hitting the lead train. That behavior is generalizable to all trains however, not just a trailing train and it is a capability that all train should have. Don’t hit the train ahead if it is stopped then you have to start. You have to begin deacceleration and stop before you reach it. If it is slowed down, then you have to slow down as well. That means that in theory any number of trains could be on the same track and not run into one another that they would maintain a safe distance. It also means that the concept of two trains having to be paired in order to affect a station stop behavior where one stops behind and then moves up is no longer relevant. The new rule can be. There’s no train in front of you make a station stop at the platform if there’s a if a train stopped in front of you requires you to stop sooner than when you can move on up to the to the platform. The only difference now for a leading locomotive is that it waits for the trailing locomotive.

Some possibilities that this capabilities would allow and this is just a start I can imagine more. One would be if a train is at the station, but moving out the trailing train comes in as slows down to a safe, trailing speed and slowly moves up. That a leading train is programmed to skip some stations and that means when the trailing train gets there it treats it like a regular station cause there’s no leading train to stop for and then if it catches up with the leading train, then the leading train is stopped in the station and it will just maintain a safe, stopping distance and stop behind it. It also means that the Old express circuit express behavior becomes much simpler as well. The leading train just needs to not stop at the stations and when it catches up with the other train, it will if the other train is traveling between stations, then the express train will slow down and follow it at a speed and then when they get to the next station, the train that is ahead will stop at the platform and then the one that was the express train, but is now behind will will stop because it stops automatically because there’s a train stop ahead of it. So really circuit express becomes much simpler. It just becomes a command to temporarily suspend the station stops for a locomotive that happens to be in the lead.